well I want to thank Emily and Bob and
Greg for the kind invitation to come
here and present some of our recent uh
historical information on cancer as a
metabolic
disease um I don't want this to be too
loud is it too loud am I blowing
somebody's eardrum out here or anything
no okay um yeah so uh cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease uh is
what I'll be speaking about uh this
afternoon
and um I have a couple of uh quotes that
will introduce that we need to know
about I think Greg Hit Upon one of these
in his
presentation um but when we talk about
and and and what Dr Palmer was speaking
about uh we have certain mindsets in
people uh related to some of these these
quotes here from Carl Sean you know we
live in a society driven by science and
technology and most people have no clue
what's going on um Tolstoy the most
difficult subjects can be explained to
the most slow-witted man if he has not
formed any idea of them already but the
simplest thing cannot be made clear to
the most intelligent man if he's firmly
persuaded in what he knows already
without a shadow of a doubt we have
these problems assimilation bias or
confirmation bias from Francis Bacon uh
the originator of the scientific method
human understanding uh when it has once
adapted an opinion draws all things
things else to support and agree with it
and of course in our area uh follow the
money up in
Sinclair difficult to get a guy or get a
man to understand something when his
salary depends on him not understanding
it this is this is uh really all of
these together uh represent uh some of
the challenges uh that we have that
speak to your philosophy of science in
one way or another um but but what we do
is um we document every year uh the the
uh American Cancer Society one of their
major functions is to uh log the Dead uh
basically uh new cases debts per year
debts per day and you can see it's
always increasing um to some degree uh
more new cases um and and you know we're
getting almost 1,700 people A Day in the
United States dying dying from cancer uh
and if you do that if you divide that
number by 24 it comes out to about 70
people per hour okay this is not an
insignificant this is a an epidemic um
we keep throwing massive monies into
these problems billions and billions of
dollars both from the federal government
and from private foundations you know
the pink ribbon campaigns you hear all
about them people just mindlessly run
out and throw money at a problem they
have no clue where the money is going
there seems to be no accountability
either in the federal government or for
the private Foundation ations it just
seems to be a year in year year out
ritual of throwing money at a problem
with expecting something to um uh be
different and and generally it doesn't
what I do is I check the scientific
advisory Boards of the individual
foundations that support and then you
can know uh why we're not making any
progress uh this is a lot of words
cancer statistics from
2024 um what what they want to say here
is that we are making major progress in
reducing the death uh from cancer I
spoke to someone the other day couldn't
be this is the most exciting exciting
time for cancer and all this and I said
what about all the dead people yeah well
that's an unfortunate problem um but uh
but one of the things that they tell us
uh about all the progress we're making
in in the early 1990s uh there was this
anti-smoking campaign uh where
secondhand smoke was bothering people
right you sit next this guy oh you can't
so it was a peer societal peer pressure
on people that smoking you know we used
to years ago when I would go to
Scientific meetings you'd have to wave
the smoke away you couldn't even see the
slides right scientists are all puffing
away everybody's puffing away no you can
half the restaurant Smoking no smoking
now if they catch you smoking they have
a team will come out and beat you half
to death they catch a
smoking so as the result of that we've
prevented a lot of cancer deaths okay so
so the red line is all of the people
that would have died had we not smoked
all right so if we didn't stop smoking
we would have had all these dead people
people but we're still we're still on a
trajectory of of of increase so the
biggest reduction in cancer has been a
prevention one a behavior a personal
Behavior one um not what we think of all
the advertisements we hear on television
every night about how wonderful then we
show you some smiling guy riding a bike
and with 15 different ways the thing is
going to kill you the the the uh the
problem is it's it's personal choice
that that um does a lot to reduce this
so we're going to talk about cancer what
is cancer it's just disregulated cell
growth people always say what is cancer
it's cell division out of control um and
uh is is this disorder caused by genetic
mutations and we're going to talk about
that uh or is it caused by chronic
insufficient respiration coupled to
compensatory fermentation or what we
refer to as substrate level
phosphorilation um now a little bit
talking about theories in science
scientific theor simply an attempt to
explain the facts the data the facts
reality is based on replicated facts
whereas interpretation of the facts is
based on a credible Theory you collect
an out of data and people have different
ways to interpret this and if everybody
is interpreting it in a similar way then
we have a theory we can test that
credible theories move science forward
whereas flaw theories can stall
scientific
progress um now let's look at some of
these in historical um perspective the
heliocentric theory uh could explain
better the movements of celestial bodies
than could the geocentric theory now for
1,800 years the ideas of of Aristotle
and Clodius TMI uh we're focusing on try
how do you explain the movements of the
planets when the earth is immovable and
stable so we see the moon we see the sun
and we see the planets and then we see
the stars which are actually in a SE a
separate sphere um and it was series of
mathematical
epicycles uh deference where the Planet
this the planet is moving in one way
that all of a sudden decides to turn and
go in a different way a different uh
eaner with the angle of the of the Sun
during different times of the Season it
was a lot of a lot of mess for 1800
years and then um Nicholas kernus up on
up on the top uh decided he he struggled
with all the epicycles and the
mathematical problems with the um
celestial bodies he he uh said maybe if
we if we rearrange the the organ the or
the or the organization of the celestial
bodies if we put the sun in the center
and make the Earth simply another planet
uh maybe we can account better for the
predictability of where these planets
are supposed to be at at the time
they're supposed to be there so again we
find predictability uh that was far far
more accurate than previously thought
now of course the next guy Johannes
Kepler understood that they were not
just perfect circles but they were an
elliptical
uh he jumped all over um he knew exactly
what cernus was saying of course Galileo
the next guy down developed the the
telescope uh to confirm the moons of
Jupiter and also angles of the planet's
movement uh was very excited um of
course he was house arrested uh by the
Catholic you were threatening you were
threatening the power establishment at
that time which was the Catholic Church
the seed of all knowledge and
predictability um now the poor guy on
the bottom there anybody know who that
guy is the LA the guy on the the lowest
guy here anybody know who that guy is
nobody Gano Bruno you ever hear of Bruno
okay Bruno um was a cleric in the
Catholic church and he was a strong
supporter of of cernus okay and what
happened he ran around told everybody
that gez cernus is right the Earth is
not the center of the universe the sun
is that didn't go over well so they they
stripped him naked held him upside and
burned him alive in a plaza of Rome okay
he's considered the mod of science mod
of science giodo Bruno you should all
know uh Galileo got away with house
arrest but poor Bruno was burned to
death why he was challenging the power
structure at the time but there was one
thing that Bruno said that really put
the the flame to the to to the torch
here he said there might be life on
another planet oh that was it that guy's
gone forget about his ass he's finished
and that was the end of Bruno but the
key the key is it started what we call
the capern Revolution and the
Renaissance of Science in Europe is the
result of this and then we have the germ
Theory could explain better the origin
of contagious diseases than could the
bad air miasma Theory and the miasma
theory was from
Galen Greek uh Roman physician galen's
ideas about disease permeated all the
way into the 1800s and it was um Lewis
pastur who clearly showed with his
experimentation that germs actually
cause dise not bad air not miasma so um
and he was vilified by the French uh
medical aristocracy at the time and they
said you he doesn't have an MD degree
therefore we can't believe any he's only
a PhD he turned out to be right the the
MDS were not right so um and we look at
this then of course there's uh the
Darwin Wallace theory of evolution by
natural selection could explain better
the Origin of Species than could the
theory of special creation and those
little numbers on the top there they're
they are the descendants of PRI of
original ancestors that exist each one
of those horizontal lines is a
millennial could be millions of years
hundreds of thousands of years he went
through all this and you can see all the
extinctions that have occurred uh in the
organization of biological um plants and
animals o over time I have a whole
chapter in my book on cancer nothing in
cancer biology can make sense except in
the light of evolution so we we
incorporate evolutionary theory into our
design of therapies that we use in the
land
um and thank you to Chris Palmer for at
least identifying what the mitochondria
are it's actually a spaghetti Network
inside the cell uh we these diagrams
that you see in textbooks make these
things look like a little bean uh there
but they're actually a spaghetti network
is right they're actually moving around
they fuse they fiz they have a very
active uh participation in the uh
energetics and vitality of that cell um
so can the mitochondrial metabolic
theory explain better the or in
management of cancer then can the
sematic mutation Theory this is the next
big transformation in in medicine um
what which of these theories is correct
and we're going to we're going to do a
dive on this and let you as rational
thinkers come to your own decision as to
what you think might be uh what we're
dealing with here so does cancer arise
from nuclear somatic
mutations or from chronic mitochondrial
damage with compensatory fermentation
there's a two two step here you have to
have the chronic damage and you have to
have protracted
compensatory uh fermentation or what we
refer to in our lab is substrate level
phosphorilation fortunately I have my
research crew back here if if if they if
I screw up with one thing they will
attack me so um not you good folks those
guys so and Bob is there with the rest
of them there so I got to be careful so
so anyway uh we're going to talk about
these these Concepts so so we're looking
at the two organ the two um organel here
the mitochondrian and the nucleus and
the semantic mutation theory of cancer
says the disregulated cell growth is due
to mutations in the nucleus that cause
the cell to become growth dis growth
disregulated or growing out of control
and I will present evidence that um
challenges that so we put up this paper
this is by hannahan and Weinberg um
they're down here at Robert Weinberg is
at MIT
um and this is one of the most highly
cited papers in all of bi biology cited
by 75,000 times uh so Hallmarks of
cancer the Next Generation a dogmatic
view an irrefutable irrefutable truth a
silent assumption if you will cancer is
a genetic disease um and cancer cells
carry the oncogenic and tumor suppressor
mutations that Define cancer as a
genetic disease page 661 in the paper
you can read it if you have the paper
not I can send it to you um okay so this
this concept has now permeated all of
the textbooks of biology and
biochemistry uh cell biology all the
medical students when they get their
first year of training and they do
biochemistry or whatever they're talking
about cancer as a as a genetic disease
uh driven by uh different kinds of
mutations that we're going to look at
not only that um it's also supported
from the National Cancer insute our
government cancer website National
Cancer Institute what it says right
there cancer is a genetic disease that
is it is caused by changes to genes that
control the way our cells function
especially how how they grow um and
divide and then you see down on the
bottom there cancer is is caused by
certain changes to genes all right so
this is confirmation
bias um what what it means is we all
terms of Francis assimilation bias
confirmation bias the whole field says
that this has to
a genetic disease because the NCI says
it is and everybody else thinks it is
not everybody but a lot of people so
let's look at this sematic mutation
Theory so if you're going to understand
what the current theory of manag of of
cancer is because ultimately if you
think you understand what the disease is
and you should be able to strategize
therapies that manage it and you just
saw all the dead people piling up
something's not right okay so we have
mutations in tumor suppressor genes and
and genes or Proto Anka genes leading to
cell division out of control so we look
further at this and we see tumor
suppressor Gene this is a normal product
of some Gene a protein of a gene in our
genome and it keeps normal cells in a
growth regulated State a mutation
happens in that Gene and you get
disregulated uh cell growth so this is
called tumor suppressor these are tumor
suppressors but in addition to tumor
suppressors we also have these things
called protooncogene protooncogene is a
normal Gene in our body if it's it gets
a mutation some sort of mutation but
there's several different kinds of of
genetic changes you can have a mutation
in the normal protooncogene and then
that causes an enog Gene which drives
makes the cells grow faster so you can
have a mutation in there or you can have
extra copies multiple copies of this
Proto anco Gene leading to normal growth
stimulating proteins in excess or you
can have the gene can actually move
around the genome and find itself next
next to a different kind of a promoter
forcing the product to be uh in excess
leading to disregulated cell growth so
we have the tumor suppressor genes Proto
onogen and enogen and these kinds of
things and this is all part of the
sematic mutation Theory the current
dogmatic view of what we think cancer
happens to be um so this is Dr
vogelstein from John's Hopkins uh when
he says that um uh we now know precisely
what causes cancer
a sequential series of alterations in
well defined and remember this term
driver genes okay not all the genes we
found oh my God there's some that don't
do anything passengers valleys Hills all
this kind of stuff drivers are the key
so the key to managing cancer is going
to be to Target the driver genes that
are causing the disregulated growth in a
tumor in your body okay or causing a
particular population of cells to become
disregulated all these things happen now
here we are today uh individuals cancer
cells this uh genetically tested for
personalized therapy you hear about all
this Precision medicine personalized
therapy uh all this kind of stuff um
breast cancer cells being examined to
see if they possess extra copies of a
particular Gene there was a a company
down here in Kendall Square Boston that
was bought out for $2.4 billion dollar
it's a company that looks at tissue from
cancer patients and looks at hundreds of
different kinds of of mutations and and
you get this nice read out oh gee look
all mutations I have look at you they
looking up that they say you can give
you a short list for 4,000 but if you
really want the the Cadillac list you
can pay another $7,500 and they'll give
you thousands of different mutations and
you say wow what are we going to do with
all this information um but anyway the
information keeps a lot of people
employed looking at screens and things
like this um but you also have the
observer effect which is the um
Heisenberg uncertainty principle applied
in in human tissue by looking at it and
disturbing it you have changed it so
what she's looking at May no longer be
what's happening inside your breast or
colon or whatever that taking the the
tumor from now again we we already heard
uh about ionius and his um papers before
this is a paper from his group um
showing that the new cancer drugs aren't
working and uh the bottom line is they
looked at 92 drugs over from 2000 to
2016 and what's very interesting about
these therapies if you look at the
tumors that of the patients that were
treated with these various kinds of
precision drugs or whatever you want to
call them it looked like the tumors were
wow the tumors really responding well
it's unbelievable but the parents but
the people don't live in it very little
like two and a half months longer uh
what I understand is that the Food and
Drug
Administration determines whether a new
drug should be given to human beings
based on progression-free Survival that
means what does the drug look like it's
doing to the tumor and if there is some
modum of overall survival benefit well
that's great but we really should be
looking at does the drug keep you alive
far longer than any of these other drugs
and they don't look at that that's not
part of what they're looking at so um
now evidence challenging sematic
mutation Theory and whenever you
challenge the Dogma you end up like
Bruno right so you got to be careful so
um people don't want to look at it they
don't want to talk about it uh they
don't want to hear about it and then of
course we always like to Einstein we're
all big on whatever Einstein had to say
uh no amount of experimental
experimentation can prove me right but a
single experiment can prove me wrong
well let me show you stuff that should
have proved the sematic mutation Theory
hopelessly wrong okay and why we
continue to think that cancer is a
genetic disease and I'll let you guys
make the decision so theer bovy um in
1914 uh wrote this paper purely
speculative paper where he thought that
cancer might be have something to do
with abnormal chromosomal Behavior
movement of chromosomes he's he he he
came to that Revelation looking at
searing
and he even said I have no clue how sea
urchins are related to cancer and even
his friends in cancer said you know
Theodore I think you're you know you're
out to lunch we so I'm probably totally
wrong and I want to apologize the entire
s cancer community that I'm wrong I have
no knowledge I'm ignorant and now we've
anointed him as the father of the
somatic mutation theories so go figure
um now oh okay now we're looking at now
this is really interesting we're finding
some cancers that have no sematic
mutations um Greenman showed this Baker
Parsons and everyone and those are big
papers um so you say wow look at that
there's a bunch of can he found 30% of
breast tumors using a very powerful
genomic sequencing analysis had no had
no mutations yet some other breast
cancers had thousands and thousands of
mutations but I was looking for how you
explain that in your sematic mutation
Theory nothing same with Parsons they
couldn't find in one of the GLE GBM
papers uh patients had no mutations and
any the major signaling cascad well
interesting uh Now new new data new data
are showing us that these cancer driver
genes are abundant in all of our cells
that never become cancer it's
unbelievable so if we took samples from
all we have loaded with driver you go
down to Dana Farber they say oh we're
going to start radiating poison you you
got all these mutations so so well it's
wrong with me I'm perfectly healthy how
what are you oh no no you got the driver
mutation so um uh and this can also
account in part for when you give
immunotherapies to some people the
immunotherapy sometimes kills you before
the cancer does the pro the problem is
of course and and and and Martin Karina
pointed that out okay we're going to
Target precise there's that mut is that
epitope but oh my kidney also has that
well we're going to take your kidney out
along with the cancer what's going to
kill you faster so we got it's called
hyper Progressive disease and it's a
well-known phenomenon in cancer uh some
cancers don't have m don't cause
mutations like asbestos right asbestos
um the Rarity of cancer is it's rare in
Aboriginal tribes okay people who live
according to their traditional ways like
these Africans and ints from the Arctic
and all these the British were shocked
uh Albert schwitzer couldn't figure out
well he went he looked at 10,000
Africans through these nobody had cancer
it was strikingly different from the
Europeans um and the ints uh I went to
the medical school uh at Thunder I was
invited there to give a talk some years
ago it's a it's a medical school in
thunderbay Canada and they service the
the Inuits um and they're massively
unhealthy uh obesity diabetes dementia
all kinds of things and yet 150 years
100 years ago they were some of the
healthiest people on the planet right
and all they did was eat meat and fat
and stuff like this they weren't eating
vegetables or fruits or this very many
except seasonal um very interesting when
the diet a western diet lifestyle enters
your population brace yourselves you're
going to have all kinds of chronic
diseases um and then of course our
closest uh biological relative the
chimpanzee at 98% similar to us in Gene
and protein sequence and there's never
been a documented case of breast cancer
and a female chimpanzee and breast
cancer is is caused a big problem in in
in females and even males with uh uh
with this disorder what's the difference
here the chimp is living according to
his diet and lifestyle whether he's in
the forest or whether he's in Franklin
Zoo down here in Boston um whether he's
in San Diego Zoo I was at the San Diego
Zoo and I and I said to the and I was
also down here I talked to the vet I
says why don't you give the gorillas a
big go out and get a big box of jelly
donuts for these things I'm sure they
would like it oh yeah they really like
it but but it's very unhealthy I said
what the
hell I'm standing here eating the jelly
donut
right I start looking back at what's
going on which you know it's just we're
not allowed to do these kinds of
experiments on chimp it's called animal
cruelty can you believe it so uh I
checked I go down for yourself ask the
ask the bet uh now the the the nail and
the coffin came from what I simply did
was went out looked at all these studies
that transplanted Mito nucleus from Mito
from from from tumor cells normal move
Mito move move both nucleus and
mitochondria back and forth between
different cells I didn't do these
experiments what I did for the very
first time is reinterpret it again
reinterpret the data that's already
there in a different light and I
published this paper this was actually I
did it in my book in 20 2012 and this
was 2015 um it's got over 100,000 views
and downloads right now and and and this
is this is the very simplistic summary
of dozens and dozens of replicated
experiments replicated so green cell
green cells get other green cells normal
cells get normal cells the nucleus is
healthy the mitochondria structure and
function are healthy and they produce
cells that are regulated in their growth
during normal turnover and things like
this red cells are tumor cells tumor
cells beget tumor cells so the tumor
cell of course for the majority of them
they have genetic defects that is true
some don't but many do and they also
abnormalities in number structure and
function of the
mitochondria and what so what is causing
the disregulated growth is it the
mutations in the nucleus or is it
something in the cytoplasm AB alities in
the number structure and function of
mitochondria so when the red nucleus
from the red cell is placed in the green
cytoplasm this was done by Israel and
Schaefer in vitro and and in Vivo both
uh they got regulated growth which was
scratch in their head um and then they
took the nucleus from the normal cell
and put it in the cytoplasm of the tumor
cell and they got disregulated growth
this is just the opposite just the
absolute opposite of what you would have
expected if driver genes are controlling
disregulated cell growth you would
wouldn't get these kinds of experiments
newer experiments now if you take the
green mitochondria and purify them and
put them into the red cytoplasm you get
regulated growth and if you take
abnormal mitochondria and put them into
indolent cells they become explosive so
clearly what the nature is telling us is
that this is a disorder driven by
mitochondrial dysfunction not by nuclear
mutations in the nucleus so if sematic
mutations are not the origin of cancer
then how do cancer cells arise we to
know the answer to this and this goes
back to the work of OT warberg uh the
German scientist a fascinating book
written by um Apple Sam Apple uh he was
a a Jewish scientist who Hitler spared
Hitler feared cancer kept warberg alive
during the Holocaust with the hope that
he would cure cancer someday um but what
warberg actually found is that cancer
arises from chronic damage to cellular
respiration we're breathing we get our
we're all breathing here we're getting
our oxygen from from oxidative
phosphorilation energy through this is
what we're working on substrate level
phosphorilation is a non-oxidative form
of energy you move a phosphate group
from an organic molecule onto ADP to get
ATP it's different from oxidative
phosphorilation it's an ancient pathway
these are the way cells got energy
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
two and a half billion years ago so the
cancer cells upregulate these ancient
substrate level phosphorilation Pathways
um cancer cells continue to ferment
glucose in the presence of oxygen
aerobic fermentation should should not
happen this called warberg effect lot
we're working on that all the confusion
about warberg effect also the red is our
big contribution uh to the cancer field
uh we now have found that amino acid
glutamine the most abundant amino acid
in our bloodstream can also be fermented
in cancer cells this is different than
what everybody thought they thought it
was respired
uh Derek Lee sitting here is got some of
the strongest evidence and I'll be
showing I'll be showing you that we're
really we work with kristo opolis at
sewi University in in U Budapest Hungary
uh he's the world leader on substrate
level phosphorilation in the mitochondr
and we're now doing research so warberg
didn't know about this okay so they
threw warberg under the bus when the
when Watson and Creek Crick discovered
the the genes everybody ran oh these
tumor cells of Lo mutation what happened
to warberg guy P say he was right
essentially right he just didn't have
all the parts of the puzzle we now put
some of those parts out connected the
docks and shown he was he was
essentially correct so enhanced
fermentation is the signature malady of
all cancer cells um now if you look at a
tumor and you go down and get the woman
to look at all the different mutations
every cell in that tumor has a different
constellation of genetic mutations
they're not all the same this breast
tumor that breast tumor they're all
different from each other nobody has the
same even within the same tumor all the
cells are different from each other but
one thing is common to all of those
cells they are fermenting they're
getting their energy from a nonoxidative
source so the key to manage can answer
is to take away the fermentation fuels
okay I mean not complicated and you're
going to come to realize
that so what's the evid are you sure
about that well let's look under the
electron microscope because that's when
you can really see mitocondria structure
and you can isolate them and look at
their function so the the the the cell
those nice beautiful Stripes they are
the ciste they contain the proteins and
the lipids that drive the electron
transport chain Chris showed a picture
of the electron transport chest so so
that that's a healthy mitochondria the
one on the right that's a gleo blastoma
mitochondri deadly brain cancer and you
can see the chist a missing it's called
cristalis a ghost
mitochondria structure determines
function it's an evolutionary conserve
concept if the structure of the organel
is abnormal the function of that organel
will be abnormal so you can see that and
now what about breast breast cancer on
the on the right the hmsc there's normal
breast breast cells normal breast SE the
nice beautiful Stripes of the Christ we
did we don't forget we we brute forced
these mitochondria we actually took out
all the lipids we analyzed everything in
incredible molecular detail and the
cancer cells have very abnormal uh
lipidome in the in you can see the vacul
in the breast those spots there are
vacul col rectal cancer CRC mitochondria
that are empty with tristate structure
determines
function now what I did is I went back
and looked at all human cancers that we
have studied over the years uh decades
from the 60s 7s 80s in the in the early
days of the electron microscopy uh
development people were looking at
everything and they were recording what
they saw so I just went back and said
look at these guys are seeing all these
different cancers abnormal structure and
function uh uh appearance of
mitochondria all the it represents over
90% bladder breasts colorl gomas blood
cancers livers melanomas osteosarcomas
pancreas prostate they're all similar
they all have a problem they have
abnormalities and number structure and
function of the mitochondria and our
most recent study with Dr T here we put
that together when you can't
respire lipids can be deadly because
they'll create reactive oxygen species
and potentially kill the cell so what
the cell does is evacuates them they put
the the lipids in these lipid drops LD
lipid drops that's a sign that the
mitochondria aren't working because if
they were use those fatty acids they'd
explode from the Ross So to protect the
cell from Death they store them in these
droplets and you can see uh we went
through L and I all the major cancers
all of these are different coloral
breast cancer blood cancers they're all
storing lipid drops it's a marker for
deficient oxidative phosphorilation
meaning that those cells need to ferment
what do they ferment glucose and
glutamine right
how come nobody's targeting the glucose
and glutamine too simple very simple
can't do simple
things okay so when we look at energy
metabolism in normal cells here's a very
simple okay the glycolysis called the
mden myov parns pathway documented well
St glucose as metabolized through a
10-step process to pyu pyu goes into the
kreb cycle fully oxidized producing uh
reducing equivalence these nadh fadh2
deliver their electrons the electron
transport chain and lo and behold we get
tremendous amounts of energy and with
the waste waste products of CO2 and
water CO2 and water come right
out but we also get a little energy from
substrate level phosphorilation these
are the ancient Pathways that existed
for energy metabolism before oxygen came
into the atmosphere so we have a little
bit of energy in normal cells from those
Pathways but the cancer cell if you
notice it you see the shift you get a
lot of energy now from these ancient
fermentation Pathways called substrate
level
phosphorilation uh and you can see 40
we're not really sure this is one of the
debating points where we're not sure all
we know is that energy through oxidative
phosphorilation is neither necessary nor
sufficient for driving disregulated cell
growth uh glucose and glutamine
fermentation in the cytool and the
mitochondria mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation are are necessary
and sufficient for driving disregulated
cell growth now I don't want to bore you
with these we love these things you know
we can spend hours looking at this stuff
you know but you can see glycolysis and
glutaminolysis those are the two driving
Pathways that provide the energy for
disregulated cell growth and the
metabolites needed for new for new
growing cells and you can see these star
bursts here so glutamine glutaminolysis
glycolysis and energy the oxy these
taner cells are in fact taken in oxygen
okay but they're blowing out reactive
oxygen species that are carcinogenic and
mutogenic so we're not getting very much
energy from oxos we're getting more
energy from substrate level
phosphorilation with suic acid and
lactic acid as waste products not CO2 in
water suic acid and lactic acid and
we've measured that Derek's measured
that now this is Derek's uh gift to
mankind uh he put He put a lot of
energies Derek stand up there well you
let people see who you are there there
he is right there so so he put a lot of
energy into this and we thought about
how we're driving disregulated cell
growth uh through uh through using
glucose and glutamine as fermentable
fuels and there came up with the idea
that this is a high throughput these
cancer cells are sucking down these two
fuels in enormous amounts relative to
normal cells and we're blowing out
lactic acid and succinic acid into the
micro environment you know one of the
biggest things in oncology is my
immunotherapies don't work my my chemo
doesn't work my radiation doesn't work
there's so much acidification in the
micro environment it's blocking all
these things from working where the
crisis where's it coming from glucose
and glutamine if I take away glucose and
glutamine these things now become
vulnerable but nobody's doing that right
nobody's doing that but anyway Derek
showed that all the linkages these two
powerful pathways are feeding off of
each other in a synergistic way driving
the disregulated cell growth and the
metabolites needed to make new cancer
cells and then we put this together okay
we got the beautiful normal mitochondria
on the left and over time chronic
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation
leads to ghost mitochondria the Delta G
Prime ATP this is the key that you have
to know that is underlying the Energy
Efficiency so we're keeping the Energy
Efficiency but we're Shifting the green
line goes down that's oxidated phosphor
and then there's a protracted increase
in substrate level phosphorilation to
bring Einstein back again uh substrate
level
phosphorilation is linked to malignancy
as strong as gravity is linked to the
red shift anybody know what Einstein's
red shift is the pull of gravity on
photons okay was an unbelievable thing
that's how strong the were linkages so
we can now put all the parts of the
puzzle together again the common
pathophysiological mechanism for cancer
is damage to a mitochondria that can
come from radiation chemical carcinogens
intermittent hypoxia systemic
inflammation rare inherited mutations
Ras enogen oncogenic viruses older age
every one of these things impacts
negative on the structure and function
of the mitochondria producing reactive
oxygen species R which are carcinogenic
and mutogenic so most of the mutations
that we see in the nucleus of the tumor
cell are Downstream effects of
mitochondrial damage and dysfunction yet
we're chasing taals we're not chasing
the origin so Ross go on now the enogen
turn on and their floodgates those are
those High throughput Pathways or
glycolysis and glutaminolysis are driven
because the mitochondria is suffering so
how are the cell going to survive it has
to get an alternative energy the turn of
energy is substrate level
phosphorilation driven by glucose and
glutamine and now we can take all of the
uh Hallmarks of cancer produced by
Einstein produced by Robert Weinberg and
Hanahan and Link every one of those back
to dysfunctional uh failing function of
of mitochondria now there's a book Sid
Mukerji wrote the um New York Times
bullet surprise winning book The Emperor
of all maladies all right muker it was
on the best seller list for for a long
time he struggles in the book I don't
understand what's the common
pathophysiological I don't understand I
don't understand that and the end of the
book is very Bleak yeah it's true read
it I said for Christ's sake didn't you
read that you should have read some of
our papers you wouldn't have been he
might have the depression you have to
treat with he should be on a ketogenic
diet or
something
Jesus so now if most cancer cells obtain
energy through fermentation what
therapies might be effective for
managing well one approach is let's
target those reduce those fermentable
fuels and now I'm going to show you the
evidence I'm going to show you the power
of predictability as Greg would say if
you're on the right path you should be
able to predict something right so let's
see if we can predict um so here's the
strategy metabolic management of cancer
following changes in plasma glucose and
ketones okay let's lower the lower the
glucose uh water only fasting I'm going
to talk about that in a minute um
calorie restriction restricted ketogenic
diets uh and then rais Ketone levels
because it's the glucose that's driving
the disregulated growth and now we're
going to give them fatty acids and
ketones to choke on right and and not
only that it'll make the rest of your
cells healthy we're going to increase
the Delta G Prime ATP hydris this is the
key for for ketones are effective
because they increase your Delta G Prime
Richard V good friend of
mine now look at this the adbm is to
give the mouse all he likes let him eat
as much as he wants and then the other
guy the CR group calorie restricted 40%
uh calorie restriction three days post
inoculum and you can see we got a huge
reduction in the size of that tumor it's
obvious people say Wow all I have to do
is cut my calories back by 40% oh that's
pretty impressive not wrong okay 40% in
a mouse is water only
fasting do you have another can you
there's something else you can do you
know they don't want to water only fast
you can't get people lining up for that
but but any event this mouse have no
choice we put them in a cage we just
give them what they so now here's
something I want to share with you uh
for Greg's
Amusement um he doesn't know about this
anyway I don't know when he first saw my
book what does he do he turns it over to
his father to ask if I'm right funny
right he suffered having to measure nail
lengths as a punishment when he was a
kid so what he did to me he's punished
me by giving his father my book and
having him eviscerate my my uh data so
all these red lines are Jeff glassman's
critique of what so I had to sit down
and spend days and days paging out
exactly what we did how many mice I gave
him the raw data from the experiments
and I let him look at it I explained
every one of his little red lines there
and what he was concerned about and all
this kind of stuff and I I did Pera and
I Perna says to me my other staff member
boy this is a smart guy but we're we're
not that dumb so so we we had to spend
our time going back to address every one
of great Jeff's criticisms and finally
he writes me a letter but maybe you did
maybe more more satisfactory to me thank
you very much for explaining I actually
accept what you're
saying okay I got it I got it better
than you he actually thought you
understated your case mathematically
yeah well he he might be right about
that but I wasn't understating I had to
present the way we looked at it but it
was a great experience and exercise for
us to look at how someone else's brain
would would view the information and if
we were able to communicate the
information back and forth to satisfy
both groups yeah you know regardless of
what he said I was I was kind of done
with it at the nuclear and uh and uh
mitochondrial transfer experiments yeah
that's enough yeah well that but for a
lot of people it wasn't
but you tell
me you're the guy with all the answers
right no I don't know either it's it's
it's called confirmation bias dog Dogma
Dogma you can't change religion in
people ask for a more elegant experiment
to demonstrate the case yeah well I I
put everything out there and people
still say cancer is a gen I mean what
are you GNA do so uh but anyway I got we
got a lot of work from from a Jeff's
work and allows it's it's when you have
people that are not directly in your
field and they see the data and you have
to examine how they are viewing this
information therefore our explanations
need to be more more clear and accurate
to make others also recognize uh what
we're doing but I thought you'd enjoy
that because we had to spend a lot of
time addressing those issues um but any
event
predictability uh which is very
important and these each each square is
a mouse under a different dietary uh
condition and um and we and we did
linear regression analysis is which is
actually choosing one as the causative
and another one as as the effect so
glucose was the independent varial beta
hydroxy butter is is is the Ketone body
in the blood and the tumor weight is the
size so what we see here on the left is
that blood sugar goes down in these
animals ketones go up this is a
evolutionary conservation of of energy
when you stop eating if you don't the
brain doesn't get energy you're going to
go unconscious so the body mobilizes fat
turns them into Ketone bodies water
soluble fat breakdown products and
that's clearly related to low insulin
higher glucagon more ketones but on the
right you'll see as the as the glucose
goes down the size of the tumor goes
down the tumors got smaller as the blood
sugar went down and the the higher the
blood sugar the faster the tumor would
grow this is the first evidence in the
scientific literature that I'm aware of
predicting that rate of tumor growth is
is linked directly to blood sugar since
this has been pointed out we've seen it
in G blastoma colon cancer breast cancer
bladder can all the different cancers
that have been looked at the higher the
blood sugar the more the less likely the
earlier the patient will die so there is
definitely a predictability in cancer uh
for blood glucose levels um now what we
did based on a lot of interaction with
cancer patients uh we built the glucose
Ketone index calculator which is a
quantitative assessment of uh of the
ratio of glucose to ketones so glucose
is usually measured me in deiler we
convert that to Millar and then we
measured Ketone so you have this gki and
what we've determined that levels of 2.0
or below put one in nutritional ketosis
and what is nutritional ketosis it's
essentially the way we existed during
the Paleolithic period we didn't have we
had a lot of exercise a tremendous
amount of exercise we had almost no we
had no highly processed carbohydrates in
our diet so we had to move a lot uh we
we ate just predominantly low
carbohydrate U plants and animals mostly
animals um and uh what we're doing is
simply taking people it and people say
oh what do I have to eat to get a gki
yeah you can do it with a ketogenic you
can do with a Mediterranean diet you can
do it with the pescatarian diet we can
do it with any kind of a diet uh so and
each person would have to adjust for
themselves whether it's cultural
religious or or whatever uh to get their
gki and now we're fine I built this for
the G GBM patients and then we switched
it to all cancer patients that will
benefit from this but now now as a
prevention of cancer healthy guys like
these CrossFit people and these other
people they want to see how low they can
get their gki because they're back in
the Paleolithic period my good friend
Dominic di austino lives lives in this
uh environment constantly so it's a very
good way to prevent cancer as well well
as managing it now what we did here was
we took um press pulse comes from aens
and West paleo
paleobiologists uh for destruction of
exterminations of
plants and animals on the planet but we
we actually adopted the concepts we have
press therapies and pulse therapies the
Press therapy you you you put them on
restricted ketogenic diets water only
fasting this kind of thing even Ketone
supplements Stress Management like like
Chris was saying very very important
because when you're under stress
glucocorticoids go up all right so you
got to keep your glucocorticoids down
you got to reduce stress um a lot of
people with cancer are freaked out they
all think they're going to die so Stress
Management is very important lowers the
glucose makes the metabolic therapy work
better then you come in with a doses
timing and scheduling of glucose
targeting Ketone um glutamine targeting
and hyperbaric oxygen which can
eventually replace R radiation uh for
killing you can kill tumor cells by
reactive oxygen species but you're
enhancing the health and vitality of the
normal cells uh while you're while
you're selectively destroying the tumor
cells so we move the patient from
disease state to a managed State and
then with improvements and doses timing
and scheduling we can move from the
management potentially to uh the state
of resolution uh Dr duer also working in
my lab uh we have a a major paper under
review right now from a major medical uh
uh Journal uh with more than 20 MDS and
phds on this for the metabolic
management of gleo blastoma which this
is the framework but the actual nuts and
bolts of how to treat cancer patients on
a day-to-day basis and all the things
you might encounter in trying to treat
IND individuals personalized nutrition
all of these kinds of things is in that
is in that paper so when that paper
comes out there's no excuse for anybody
not to treat cancer patients because
here's the H to manual to do it this was
the framework for doing it so let me
talk just a little bit about gleo
blastoma terrible brain cancer this is
what killed John McCain Ted Kennedy and
uh many other folks Bo Biden the
president's son uh and it's a terrible
disease uh you can see how how how bad
the brain looks the brain gets patients
die from interc cranial pressure um
those purple cells on the right those
are the tumor cells they go across the
the surface of the blood vessels called
virco Robin stasis and they can see the
entire brain even though you can't see
the tumor cells you see only this
discoloration in cystic area but the
tumor cells are out so that that's why
they always say we can never get all the
cancer it always there it's always there
to some extent because the tumor cells
have already seeded out into the parena
now here's another very interesting
thing let me let me just I I just
have predictability what you call oh um
no no failure to replicate Emily didn't
you say that Greg says failure to
replicate right okay nothing is more
replicable than how how how fast you're
going to die with the GBM look at these
look at this this is five surgical
institutions you can't design more
replicable survival data than this every
all these and we can go all over the
world in every major brain cancer center
you're going to get a a survival curve
that looks like that highly
replicable we just heard about how hard
it is in the oncology field to replicate
data look how replicable this is and
there hasn't been any Improvement in 100
years right 1926 8 to 14 Months
20248 8 to 16 months medium survival
what's going on 100 years we got we got
red telescope we crying out loud and we
can't move the needle on this GBM why
what is going on for why we're not
moving the needle and survivability for
this
cancer and we published this paper and
you ask me why people don't listen to
what we're saying when you debulk the
tumor cut it out in Mass you create a
wound and then as soon as the patient
wakes up you start irradiating the
patient right that breaks apart the
glutamine glutamate cycle in the brain
freeing up massive amounts of glutamine
the fuel that's one of the two fuels and
when your brain is irradiated they give
you high dose steroids to reduce the
inflammation which gives you
hypoglycemia I just showed you the
higher the glucose the faster the tumor
is going to
grow right I mean it's it's it's obvious
you're the two fuels driving the
disregulated growth are created by the
standard of care what we're doing to
these poor people is denying them for
the most part you saw how replicable
replicable replicable it's because
everybody on the planet is getting the
same treatment there's no differences
standard a Care standard a care happens
in India Germany Japan all over the
world they're doing the same thing so
this is explainable it's explainable
because you're not allowing the person's
brain to recover from the surgery and
take and targeting the glucose and the
glutamine simultaneously so we we
developed the therapy using the vm3 GBM
Mouse model which has all the growth
characteristics as I just see in human
GBM all the the ways they grow and we
use this drug Dawn do deoxy Oxon
Lucine which is a glutamine analog and
the glutamine analog looks like
glutamine and it blocks glutamine
utilization so we we G put the mice on a
ketogenic diet uh lowering the blood
sugar elevating the ketones and this is
the we have tremendous that I can spend
hours with you but the overall what's
the success is survival survival is
success and what you get is is uh the
Blue Line they're dying fast the green
line the diet by itself the red line the
by itself and the purple line is when
you combine the diet with the drug you
can see how powerful it is we tried this
on a uh Egyptian guy it didn't he did
really well at the beginning but they
insisted insisted on him being
irradiated I said to I said to elsaka I
said a at elsaka the attending physici I
said the guy's doing great he's he's
back in the field he's a corn farmer
he's a young guy oh no we got to we
radiator we got to we radiator I said
Jesus so anyway I said I have I'm here
in Boston he's there in Alexandri Egypt
so anyway the guy say how's the pay he
seems to be doing okay we published the
paper then at 30 months of age he starts
getting headaches um and he dies at 30
months of age and when they did the
autopsy he died from the liquefication
of radiation poisoning to the brain his
brain was liquefied by the very
treatment that they that they use for
him it was very disheartening to me then
I also wrote this paper provocative
question Harold varis runs the NCI at
the time uh Nobel Prize gu so we have
had provocative question you wanted the
provocative question change the standard
of care for GBM oh can't do that right
so anyway you're not going to we're not
going to drop the needle we're not going
to move the needle until we stop
radiating the brains of these poor GBM
patients and we say that in the big
treatment there but radiation brings
huge amounts of Revenue follow the money
so um once we once we have this Thomas's
protocol the one we write is going to
have a Major Impact if we can stop
radiating these poor folks and I always
show this one poor Britney Maynard
remembering Britney she was a young
woman January 2014 here she is with her
husband right after she get married she
gets a g blastoma actually from a lower
grade tumor that exploded into a GBM she
puts her paper um People magazine I'm
going to kill myself rather than take
the standard of care but you can see her
face is swollen that's moonface from
hide their steroids when you give people
hide those steroids they get this thing
called moon face and you can see it
there so she dies with dignity with her
family November 1 first
2014 um now this is our man Pablo uh we
wrote a case report on him U he came
same a year as Britney uh gleo blastoma
no radiation no chemo no steroid you
didn't want any of that you're go they
the attending physicians you're going to
be dead Pablo in nine months start
getting your stuff Affairs in order he
said the hell with it I'm going to he
wanted to have kids he says if I take
radiation and all that stuff I'm not
going to have kids much less I'm not
going to live to have kids but but any
event he he he he rejects that and I'm
going to talk about him in a minute
survive with good quality of life until
just this month um but any event we look
at his brain tumor you can see it when
it was this big thing with the arrow uh
then at 2016 you can see it's bigger so
he had his F first debulking surgery in
early
2017 um cut it out and we had five years
of Pablo Kelly measuring every day his
glucose Ketone IND his glucose and
ketones and the index and we plotted it
to let other people know what you might
want to do uh to reduce the rate of
growth his tumor was cut out again uh
grows for another three years cut out
again in the meantime he gets married he
has one child he has two child two
children and um uh we found out that in
in addition he had the idh1 mutation
which actually inhibits the glycolysis
and glutaminolysis Pathways giving him a
a survival Advantage slight um and I I
don't have time to talk about that but
if anybody's interest I have the crew
here that can go into a deep dive on
that but the idea is Pablo did have an
advantage he used a special diet and
lifestyle together with a God's Gift of
a therapeutic mutation not all mutations
are
bad now here's Pablo Thomas and I had a
discussion with him in August and we
were
laughing uh about P we were laughing
because he survived 10 years which was
he had survived four operations on a
previously find inoperable tumor so we
had a big laugh about this how Pablo how
many what are you going you're going to
outlive me you're going to have 20
operations on your head and all this
kind of stuff we were laughing he was
perfectly healthy was nothing wrong with
Pablo and then two days later after that
to our surprise they say oh we want to
go into in again there's some residual
we think we can get it out so he comes
out of the operating room right here
thumbs up talking and everything and
then 12 hours later cerebral hemorr and
dead from the operation not from the
tumor he was our poster child for how
long you can live with the gleo blastoma
everybody was looking at him coming to
for Hope and everything the poor guy can
you believe
this and I I know poor Danny Danny from
Marshfield Massachusetts right down here
in the coast diagnosed in
2017 uh with Pineo blastoma goes through
the spinal cord and everything you can
see his fat face from all the steroids
radiation everything they gave this poor
little kid and then he died in
2021 from standard of care uh now
because of that we got a grant from a
British UK Childhood Center to study
Childhood Cancer thankfully for them and
we developed the Pediatric high-grade
Goma model in our in our lab per Muki
and myself um where we can put tumors
into the brains of young mice at the
same age as Danny Sheen and little kids
and we could see the tumors going down
the spinal cord so we replicated key
aspects of pediatric oncology in these
mice now I don't know if I can if I yeah
maybe I can get it so um so you can see
the difference so the guys on the left
are the guys that did were not treated
with metabolic therapy and they were
going to be all one died already but you
can see the guys on the right we gave
ketogenic diet and bendol and Dawn
targeting glucose and glutamine
simultaneously while raising Ketone
levels and we're keeping these guys
alive somewhere this is going to be a
Blockbuster in the pediatric
clinic but they don't use it because
cancer is a genetic disease haven't you
heard
it's
unbelievable uh this woman here um was
treated by uh I'm on the paper too ikiki
of this clinic in Istanbul Turkey and
you can see she was from Ohio and uh she
had breast cancer to the brain and many
many other organs so all those dark
spots are the spread of the breast
cancer around uh they they gave her
metabolically supported chemo uh for
managing in they said she had one
month one month to live get your get
your fairs in order radiation Cho did
all these horrible things to her so she
there was nothing working so she jumps
on an airplane goes to Istanbul almost
dies in the IU for two and a half weeks
according to uh abdell slok told me then
they put her on this metabolic supported
low doses of chemo very low doses we're
not throwing out like Chris said we're
not throwing everything out there's some
things that can work when you do it the
right way anyway here she is celebrating
uh her life with her husband in Hawaii
in 2021 and this last week I had to call
because I know people are going to ask
me what's going on with the woman so so
I I I I I called up slokum I says Abdel
how's this woman doing I don't want to
oh no she's fine she's got a nice letter
thanking thanking him for all the
wonderful life she has she she was a
goner she's doing fine um we got uh this
guy from Greek he had lung cancer to the
brain uh restricted ketogenic diet
primary lung cancer I'm atis guy he's
doing fine he's out 10 years I wrote a
puff piece for nature on how we can
manage prostate cancer I did all these
things and then of course with the dogs
Jimmy jimy Jimmy's here his dog with the
the blueberry tumor on his face th this
this dog this woman came to me published
this right I had to drum I had to rake
up some veterinarian uh to make it look
like a Lauren Lauren nation's a friend
of mine said Lauren come on join us
because I don't I'm not a vet so uh and
the fact the woman treated her own dog
this was a a mass cell tumor on the
dog's nose and woman first thing she
does okay no no more carbohydrates for
you poor do it's a pitbull so so so what
happens is that uh it shrunk down raw
egg uh raw chicken uh fish oil and 40%
calorie restriction just like the mice
and lo and behold uh the tumor uh
disappears um here's the dog in 2013 in
2016 complete they say oh you got have
radiation chemo it's going to cost a lot
of money dog could be very sick diarrhea
all kinds of stuff said no I don't want
that so no surgery no radiation no chemo
and look at the the dog died at 15 and a
half years of age from heart failure so
it wasn't wasn't didn't die from the
therapute fact the therapy kept the dog
alive even longer get rid of the face
and don't forget I published this
autolytic cannibal autophagy like Chris
was saying where you rearrange
mitochondria and organells within the
cell but there's also autolytic
cannibalism when you put the body under
nutritional stress every cell in your
body has to justify its existence to
function as the whole you got a tumor
that that those cells aren't functioning
well eat them so the body will turn on
them and attack and eat the tumor for
this for the good of the survival of the
home so we have stage four cancers we
don't consider terminal cancer anymore
this is not right if you do metabolic
therapy we don't know whether you're
going to die or
not um cancer Revolution by Maggie and
Brad Jones Maggie is is a long-term
Survivor of lung cancer to the brain and
she is collecting all of these folks
okay a registry of all these people that
are alive that should have been dead
and she's got dozens I'm alive I'm alive
she got all these people that are are
doing various we haven't even
standardized this yet folks once we
standardize this we're going to drop the
death rate on this cancer by 50% in 10
to 15 years the problem is how you get
through the wall of obstacles that say
you can't do this everything is you
can't you can't you can't you can't
remember that guy telling us you can't
do that the hell are you these people
need to live for Christ's
sake and then we look at this and yes uh
mitochondrial metabolic Theory can
explain better the origin and management
of cancer than the sematic mutation when
are we going to on when are we going to
get rid of this noose on our neck with
the sematic mutation crap okay we can we
can keep people alive and yeah at our
conclusions yeah it's it's not a genetic
disease it's a mitochondrial metabolic
disease driven by substrate level
phosphorilation and not only that I put
at the very end here press pulse
ketogenic chronic diseases
we're right about this chronic disease I
mean it's all related to the lack of
exercise too much carbohydrates get a GK
every already got a 2.0
gki the hospitals be running down the
streets looking for somebody to
treat everybody would be like a
crossfitter for crying out loud they're
all going to be healthy but no but you
know we have a a picture in the lab it
says pills and surgery and have hundred
obese people all lined up trying to get
the pills diant lifestyle change that
one guy in the line right so so you know
we're up against a tough tough cell
we're having a global Society of cancer
metabolic therapies we're collecting
collaborators from all over the world we
want to set up clinics uh we have people
talking to us like okay once the paper
comes out how we going to set up clinics
what are we going to do what's the
what's the NS and nuts and bolts on this
whole thing and of course we have to
thank so much our support Greg uh and
broken science and yes CrossFit when
Greg ran it that was definitely helpful
to us uh broken science corkin family
for sure uh philanthropy from maroon and
and Edward Miller Kenneth raining uh
children with cancer United Kingdom our
university has been helping us
tremendous Delaware County a deput has
been elevant this fund oh yes than get
support them and in the past the
National Cancer the ni National so I
will thank you for your attention and
I'll be happy to answer any questions if
there are any thank you
uh thanks so much